# Genomics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to
search This article is about the scientific field. For the journal, see
[Genomics (journal)](/wiki/Genomics_\\(journal\\)). "Genome biology" redirects
here. For the journal with the same name, see [Genome
Biology](/wiki/Genome_Biology). Discipline in genetics Part of [a
series](/wiki/Category:Genetics) on **[Genetics](/wiki/Genetics)**
![Hybridogenesis in water frogs gametes.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
commons/thumb/f/f0/Hybridogenesis_in_water_frogs_gametes.svg/150px-
Hybridogenesis_in_water_frogs_gametes.svg.png) Key components *
[Chromosome](/wiki/Chromosome) * [DNA](/wiki/DNA) * [RNA](/wiki/RNA) *
[Genome](/wiki/Genome) * [Heredity](/wiki/Heredity) *
[Mutation](/wiki/Mutation) * [Nucleotide](/wiki/Nucleotide) *
[Variation](/wiki/Genetic_variation) * [Outline](/wiki/Outline_of_genetics) *
[Index](/wiki/Index_of_genetics_articles) History and topics *
[Introduction](/wiki/Introduction_to_genetics) *
[History](/wiki/History_of_genetics) * [Evolution](/wiki/Evolution)
([molecular](/wiki/Molecular_evolution)) * [Population
genetics](/wiki/Population_genetics) * [Mendelian
inheritance](/wiki/Mendelian_inheritance) * [Quantitative
genetics](/wiki/Quantitative_genetics) * [Molecular
genetics](/wiki/Molecular_genetics) Research * [DNA
sequencing](/wiki/DNA_sequencing) * [Genetic
engineering](/wiki/Genetic_engineering) * Genomics (![Template](//upload.wikim
edia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/5/5c/Symbol_template_class.svg/12px-
Symbol_template_class.svg.png) [template](/wiki/Template:Genomics)) * [Medical
genetics](/wiki/Medical_genetics) * [Branches of
genetics](/wiki/Outline_of_genetics#Branches_of_genetics) Personalized
medicine [Personalized medicine](/wiki/Personalized_medicine) *
[v](/wiki/Template:Genetics_sidebar) *
[t](/wiki/Template_talk:Genetics_sidebar) * [e](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/ind
ex.php?title=Template:Genetics_sidebar&action;=edit) **Genomics** is an
interdisciplinary field of [biology](/wiki/Biology) focusing on the structure,
function, evolution, mapping, and editing of [genomes](/wiki/Genome). A genome
is an organism's complete set of [DNA](/wiki/DNA), including all of its genes.
In contrast to [genetics](/wiki/Genetics), which refers to the study of
_individual_ genes and their roles in inheritance, genomics aims at the
collective characterization and quantification of _all_ of an organism's
genes, their interrelations and influence on the organism.[1] Genes may direct
the production of [proteins](/wiki/Proteins) with the assistance of enzymes
and messenger molecules. In turn, proteins make up body structures such as
organs and tissues as well as control chemical reactions and carry signals
between cells. Genomics also involves the sequencing and analysis of genomes
through uses of high throughput [DNA sequencing](/wiki/DNA_sequencing) and
[bioinformatics](/wiki/Bioinformatics) to assemble and analyze the function
and structure of entire genomes.[2][3][4] Advances in genomics have triggered
a revolution in discovery-based research and [systems
biology](/wiki/Systems_biology) to facilitate understanding of even the most
complex biological systems such as the brain.[5] The field also includes
studies of intragenomic (within the genome) phenomena such as
[epistasis](/wiki/Epistasis) (effect of one gene on another),
[pleiotropy](/wiki/Pleiotropy) (one gene affecting more than one trait),
[heterosis](/wiki/Heterosis) (hybrid vigour), and other interactions between
[loci](/wiki/Locus_\\(genetics\\)) and [alleles](/wiki/Allele) within the
genome.[6] ## Contents * 1 History * 1.1 Etymology * 1.2 Early sequencing
efforts * 1.3 DNA-sequencing technology developed * 1.4 Complete genomes * 1.5
The "omics" revolution * 2 Genome analysis * 2.1 Sequencing * 2.1.1 Shotgun
sequencing * 2.1.2 High-throughput sequencing * 2.2 Assembly * 2.2.1 Assembly
approaches * 2.2.2 Finishing * 2.3 Annotation * 2.4 Sequencing pipelines and
databases * 3 Research areas * 3.1 Functional genomics * 3.2 Structural
genomics * 3.3 Epigenomics * 3.4 Metagenomics * 3.5 Model systems * 3.5.1
Viruses and bacteriophages * 3.5.2 Cyanobacteria * 4 Applications of genomics
* 4.1 Genomic medicine * 4.2 Synthetic biology and bioengineering * 4.3
Conservation genomics * 5 See also * 6 References * 7 Further reading * 8
External links ##
History[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=1)] ###
Etymology[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=2)] From
the Greek ΓΕΝ[7] _gen_, "gene" (gamma, epsilon, nu, epsilon) meaning "become,
create, creation, birth", and subsequent variants: genealogy, genesis,
genetics, genic, genomere, genotype, genus etc. While the word _genome_ (from
the [German](/wiki/German_language) _Genom_, attributed to [Hans
Winkler](/wiki/Hans_Winkler)) was in use in [English](/wiki/English_language)
as early as 1926,[8] the term _genomics_ was coined by Tom Roderick, a
[geneticist](/wiki/Geneticist) at the [Jackson
Laboratory](/wiki/Jackson_Laboratory) ([Bar Harbor,
Maine](/wiki/Bar_Harbor,_Maine)), over beer at a meeting held in
[Maryland](/wiki/Maryland) on the mapping of the human genome in 1986.[9] ###
Early sequencing
efforts[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=3)] Following
[Rosalind Franklin](/wiki/Rosalind_Franklin)'s confirmation of the helical
structure of DNA, [James D. Watson](/wiki/James_D._Watson) and [Francis
Crick](/wiki/Francis_Crick)'s publication of the structure of DNA in 1953 and
[Fred Sanger](/wiki/Fred_Sanger)'s publication of the [Amino
acid](/wiki/Amino_acid) sequence of insulin in 1955, nucleic acid sequencing
became a major target of early [molecular
biologists](/wiki/Molecular_biology).[10] In 1964, [Robert W.
Holley](/wiki/Robert_W._Holley) and colleagues published the first nucleic
acid sequence ever determined, the [ribonucleotide](/wiki/Ribonucleic_acid)
sequence of [alanine](/wiki/Alanine) [transfer RNA](/wiki/TRNA).[11][12]
Extending this work, [Marshall Nirenberg](/wiki/Marshall_Nirenberg) and
[Philip Leder](/wiki/Philip_Leder) revealed the triplet nature of the [genetic
code](/wiki/Genetic_code) and were able to determine the sequences of 54 out
of 64 [codons](/wiki/Codons) in their experiments.[13] In 1972, [Walter
Fiers](/wiki/Walter_Fiers) and his team at the Laboratory of Molecular Biology
of the [University of Ghent](/wiki/University_of_Ghent) ([Ghent](/wiki/Ghent),
[Belgium](/wiki/Belgium)) were the first to determine the sequence of a gene:
the gene for [Bacteriophage MS2](/wiki/Bacteriophage_MS2) coat protein.[14]
Fiers' group expanded on their MS2 coat protein work, determining the complete
nucleotide-sequence of bacteriophage MS2-RNA (whose genome encodes just four
genes in 3569 [base pairs](/wiki/Base_pair) [bp]) and [Simian virus
40](/wiki/SV40) in 1976 and 1978, respectively.[15][16] ### DNA-sequencing
technology
developed[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=4)]
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f8/Frederick_Sanger2.jpg
/125px-Frederick_Sanger2.jpg) Frederick Sanger
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/WalterGilbert2.jpg
/125px-WalterGilbert2.jpg) Walter Gilbert [Frederick
Sanger](/wiki/Frederick_Sanger) and [Walter Gilbert](/wiki/Walter_Gilbert)
shared half of the 1980 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for Independently developing
methods for the sequencing of DNA. In addition to his seminal work on the
amino acid sequence of insulin, [Frederick Sanger](/wiki/Frederick_Sanger) and
his colleagues played a key role in the development of DNA sequencing
techniques that enabled the establishment of comprehensive genome sequencing
projects.[6] In 1975, he and Alan Coulson published a sequencing procedure
using DNA polymerase with radiolabelled nucleotides that he called the _Plus
and Minus technique_.[17][18] This involved two closely related methods that
generated short oligonucleotides with defined 3' termini. These could be
fractionated by [electrophoresis](/wiki/Electrophoresis) on a
[polyacrylamide](/wiki/Polyacrylamide) gel (called polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis) and visualised using autoradiography. The procedure could
sequence up to 80 nucleotides in one go and was a big improvement, but was
still very laborious. Nevertheless, in 1977 his group was able to sequence
most of the 5,386 nucleotides of the single-stranded
[bacteriophage](/wiki/Bacteriophage) [φX174](/wiki/Phi_X_174), completing the
first fully sequenced DNA-based genome.[19] The refinement of the _Plus and
Minus_ method resulted in the chain-termination, or [Sanger
method](/wiki/Sanger_method) (see [below](/wiki/Genomics#Shotgun_sequencing)),
which formed the basis of the techniques of DNA sequencing, genome mapping,
data storage, and bioinformatic analysis most widely used in the following
quarter-century of research.[20][21] In the same year [Walter
Gilbert](/wiki/Walter_Gilbert) and [Allan Maxam](/wiki/Allan_Maxam) of
[Harvard University](/wiki/Harvard_University) independently developed the
[Maxam-Gilbert](/wiki/Maxam-Gilbert_sequencing) method (also known as the
_chemical method_) of DNA sequencing, involving the preferential cleavage of
DNA at known bases, a less efficient method.[22][23] For their groundbreaking
work in the sequencing of nucleic acids, Gilbert and Sanger shared half the
1980 [Nobel Prize](/wiki/Nobel_Prize) in chemistry with [Paul
Berg](/wiki/Paul_Berg) ([recombinant DNA](/wiki/Recombinant_DNA)). ###
Complete genomes[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=5)]
The advent of these technologies resulted in a rapid intensification in the
scope and speed of completion of [genome sequencing
projects](/wiki/Genome_project). The first complete genome sequence of a
[eukaryotic organelle](/wiki/Eukaryotic_organelle), the human
[mitochondrion](/wiki/Mitochondrion) (16,568 bp, about 16.6 kb [kilobase]),
was reported in 1981,[24] and the first [chloroplast](/wiki/Chloroplast)
genomes followed in 1986.[25][26] In 1992, the first eukaryotic
[chromosome](/wiki/Chromosome), chromosome III of brewer's yeast
_[Saccharomyces cerevisiae](/wiki/Saccharomyces_cerevisiae)_ (315 kb) was
sequenced.[27] The first free-living organism to be sequenced was that of
_[Haemophilus influenzae](/wiki/Haemophilus_influenzae)_ (1.8 Mb [megabase])
in 1995.[28] The following year a consortium of researchers from laboratories
across [North America](/wiki/North_America), [Europe](/wiki/Europe), and
[Japan](/wiki/Japan) announced the completion of the first complete genome
sequence of a eukaryote, _[S. cerevisiae](/wiki/Saccharomyces_cerevisiae)_
(12.1 Mb), and since then genomes have continued being sequenced at an
exponentially growing pace.[29] As of October 2011[[update]](https://en.wikipe
dia.org/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit), the complete sequences are
available for: 2,719 [viruses](/wiki/Virus), 1,115 [archaea](/wiki/Archaea)
and [bacteria](/wiki/Bacteria), and 36 [eukaryotes](/wiki/Eukaryote), of which
about half are [fungi](/wiki/Fungi).[30][31] !["Hockey stick" graph showing
the exponential growth of public sequence datab
ases.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Number_of_prokaryot
ic_genomes_and_sequencing_costs.svg/300px-
Number_of_prokaryotic_genomes_and_sequencing_costs.svg.png) The number of
genome projects has increased as technological improvements continue to lower
the cost of sequencing. **(A)** Exponential growth of genome sequence
databases since 1995. **(B)** The cost in US Dollars (USD) to sequence one
million bases. **(C)** The cost in USD to sequence a 3,000 Mb (human-sized)
genome on a log-transformed scale. Most of the microorganisms whose genomes
have been completely sequenced are problematic [pathogens](/wiki/Pathogen),
such as _[Haemophilus influenzae](/wiki/Haemophilus_influenzae)_, which has
resulted in a pronounced bias in their phylogenetic distribution compared to
the breadth of microbial diversity.[32][33] Of the other sequenced species,
most were chosen because they were well-studied model organisms or promised to
become good models. Yeast (_[Saccharomyces
cerevisiae](/wiki/Saccharomyces_cerevisiae)_) has long been an important
[model organism](/wiki/Model_organism) for the [eukaryotic
cell](/wiki/Eukaryotic_cell), while the fruit fly _[Drosophila
melanogaster](/wiki/Drosophila_melanogaster)_ has been a very important tool
(notably in early pre-molecular [genetics](/wiki/Genetics)). The worm
_[Caenorhabditis elegans](/wiki/Caenorhabditis_elegans)_ is an often used
simple model for [multicellular organisms](/wiki/Multicellular_organism). The
zebrafish _[Brachydanio rerio](/wiki/Brachydanio_rerio)_ is used for many
developmental studies on the molecular level, and the plant _[Arabidopsis
thaliana](/wiki/Arabidopsis_thaliana)_ is a model organism for flowering
plants. The [Japanese pufferfish](/wiki/Japanese_pufferfish) (_[Takifugu
rubripes](/wiki/Takifugu_rubripes)_) and the [spotted green
pufferfish](/wiki/Spotted_green_pufferfish) (_[Tetraodon
nigroviridis](/wiki/Tetraodon_nigroviridis)_) are interesting because of their
small and compact genomes, which contain very little [noncoding
DNA](/wiki/Noncoding_DNA) compared to most species.[34][35] The mammals dog
(_[Canis familiaris](/wiki/Canis_familiaris)_),[36] brown rat (_[Rattus
norvegicus](/wiki/Rattus_norvegicus)_), mouse (_[Mus
musculus](/wiki/Mus_musculus)_), and chimpanzee (_[Pan
troglodytes](/wiki/Pan_troglodytes)_) are all important model animals in
medical research.[23] A rough draft of the [human genome](/wiki/Human_genome)
was completed by the [Human Genome Project](/wiki/Human_Genome_Project) in
early 2001, creating much fanfare.[37] This project, completed in 2003,
sequenced the entire genome for one specific person, and by 2007 this sequence
was declared "finished" (less than one error in 20,000 bases and all
chromosomes assembled).[37] In the years since then, the genomes of many other
individuals have been sequenced, partly under the auspices of the [1000
Genomes Project](/wiki/1000_Genomes_Project), which announced the sequencing
of 1,092 genomes in October 2012.[38] Completion of this project was made
possible by the development of dramatically more efficient sequencing
technologies and required the commitment of significant
[bioinformatics](/wiki/Bioinformatics) resources from a large international
collaboration.[39] The continued analysis of human genomic data has profound
political and social repercussions for human societies.[40] ### The "omics"
revolution[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=6)]
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/98/Metabolomics_schema.png
/220px-Metabolomics_schema.png) General schema showing the relationships of
the [genome](/wiki/Genome), [transcriptome](/wiki/Transcriptome),
[proteome](/wiki/Proteome), and [metabolome](/wiki/Metabolome)
([lipidome](/wiki/Lipidome)). Main articles: [Omics](/wiki/Omics) and [Human
proteome project](/wiki/Human_proteome_project) The English-language
[neologism](/wiki/Neologism) **omics** informally refers to a field of study
in biology ending in _-omics_, such as genomics,
[proteomics](/wiki/Proteomics) or [metabolomics](/wiki/Metabolomics). The
related suffix **-ome** is used to address the objects of study of such
fields, such as the [genome](/wiki/Genome), [proteome](/wiki/Proteome) or
[metabolome](/wiki/Metabolome) respectively. The suffix _-ome_ as used in
molecular biology refers to a _totality_ of some sort; similarly **omics** has
come to refer generally to the study of large, comprehensive biological data
sets. While the growth in the use of the term has led some scientists
([Jonathan Eisen](/wiki/Jonathan_Eisen), among others[41]) to claim that it
has been oversold,[42] it reflects the change in orientation towards the
quantitative analysis of complete or near-complete assortment of all the
constituents of a system.[43] In the study of [symbioses](/wiki/Symbiosis),
for example, researchers which were once limited to the study of a single gene
product can now simultaneously compare the total complement of several types
of biological molecules.[44][45] ## Genome
analysis[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=7)] Main
article: [Genome project](/wiki/Genome_project) After an organism has been
selected, genome projects involve three components: the sequencing of DNA, the
assembly of that sequence to create a representation of the original
chromosome, and the annotation and analysis of that representation.[6]
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/58/Genome_sequencing_proj
ect_flowchart.svg/220px-Genome_sequencing_project_flowchart.svg.png) Overview
of a genome project. First, the genome must be selected, which involves
several factors including cost and relevance. Second, the sequence is
generated and assembled at a given sequencing center (such as
[BGI](/wiki/Beijing_Genomics_Institute) or [DOE
JGI](/wiki/DOE_Joint_Genome_Institute)). Third, the genome sequence is
annotated at several levels: DNA, protein, gene pathways, or comparatively.
### Sequencing[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=8)]
Main article: [DNA Sequencing](/wiki/DNA_Sequencing) Historically, sequencing
was done in _sequencing centers_, centralized facilities (ranging from large
independent institutions such as [Joint Genome
Institute](/wiki/Joint_Genome_Institute) which sequence dozens of terabases a
year, to local molecular biology core facilities) which contain research
laboratories with the costly instrumentation and technical support necessary.
As sequencing technology continues to improve, however, a new generation of
effective fast turnaround benchtop sequencers has come within reach of the
average academic laboratory.[46][47] On the whole, genome sequencing
approaches fall into two broad categories, _shotgun_ and _high-throughput_ (or
_next-generation_) sequencing.[6] #### Shotgun
sequencing[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=9)]
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1d/ABI_PRISM_3100_Genetic
_Analyzer_3.jpg/220px-ABI_PRISM_3100_Genetic_Analyzer_3.jpg) An ABI PRISM 3100
Genetic Analyzer. Such capillary sequencers automated early large-scale genome
sequencing efforts. Main article: [Shotgun
sequencing](/wiki/Shotgun_sequencing) Shotgun sequencing is a sequencing
method designed for analysis of DNA sequences longer than 1000 base pairs, up
to and including entire chromosomes.[48] It is named by analogy with the
rapidly expanding, quasi- random firing pattern of a [shotgun](/wiki/Shotgun).
Since gel electrophoresis sequencing can only be used for fairly short
sequences (100 to 1000 base pairs), longer DNA sequences must be broken into
random small segments which are then sequenced to obtain _reads_. Multiple
overlapping reads for the target DNA are obtained by performing several rounds
of this fragmentation and sequencing. Computer programs then use the
overlapping ends of different reads to assemble them into a continuous
sequence.[48][49] Shotgun sequencing is a random sampling process, requiring
over-sampling to ensure a given [nucleotide](/wiki/Nucleotide) is represented
in the reconstructed sequence; the average number of reads by which a genome
is over-sampled is referred to as
[coverage](/wiki/Shotgun_sequencing#Coverage).[50] For much of its history,
the technology underlying shotgun sequencing was the classical chain-
termination method or '[Sanger method](/wiki/Sanger_sequencing)', which is
based on the selective incorporation of chain-terminating
[dideoxynucleotides](/wiki/Dideoxynucleotide) by [DNA
polymerase](/wiki/DNA_polymerase) during [in vitro](/wiki/In_vitro) [DNA
replication](/wiki/DNA_replication).[19][51] Recently, shotgun sequencing has
been supplanted by [high-throughput sequencing](/wiki/Dna_sequencing#Next-
generation_methods) methods, especially for large-scale, automated
[genome](/wiki/Genome) analyses. However, the Sanger method remains in wide
use, primarily for smaller-scale projects and for obtaining especially long
contiguous DNA sequence reads (>500 nucleotides).[52] Chain-termination
methods require a single-stranded DNA template, a DNA
[primer](/wiki/Primer_\\(molecular_biology\\)), a [DNA
polymerase](/wiki/DNA_polymerase), normal deoxynucleosidetriphosphates
(dNTPs), and modified nucleotides (dideoxyNTPs) that terminate DNA strand
elongation. These chain-terminating nucleotides lack a 3'-[OH](/wiki/Hydroxyl)
group required for the formation of a [phosphodiester
bond](/wiki/Phosphodiester_bond) between two nucleotides, causing DNA
polymerase to cease extension of DNA when a ddNTP is incorporated. The ddNTPs
may be radioactively or [fluorescently](/wiki/Fluorescence) labelled for
detection in [DNA sequencers](/wiki/DNA_sequencer).[6] Typically, these
machines can sequence up to 96 DNA samples in a single batch (run) in up to 48
runs a day.[53] #### High-throughput
sequencing[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=10)] See
also: [Illumina dye sequencing](/wiki/Illumina_dye_sequencing) and [Ion
semiconductor sequencing](/wiki/Ion_semiconductor_sequencing) The high demand
for low-cost sequencing has driven the development of high- throughput
sequencing technologies that [parallelize](/wiki/Multiplex_\\(assay\\)) the
sequencing process, producing thousands or millions of sequences at
once.[54][55] High-throughput sequencing is intended to lower the cost of DNA
sequencing beyond what is possible with standard dye-terminator methods. In
ultra-high-throughput sequencing, as many as 500,000 sequencing-by-synthesis
operations may be run in parallel.[56][57]
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/58/Illumina_Genome_Analyz
er_II_System.jpg/220px-Illumina_Genome_Analyzer_II_System.jpg) Illumina Genome
Analyzer II System. Illumina technologies have set the standard for high-
throughput massively parallel sequencing.[46] The [Illumina dye
sequencing](/wiki/Illumina_dye_sequencing) method is based on reversible dye-
terminators and was developed in 1996 at the Geneva Biomedical Research
Institute, by Pascal Mayer and Laurent Farinelli.[58] In this method, DNA
molecules and primers are first attached on a slide and amplified with
[polymerase](/wiki/Polymerase) so that local clonal colonies, initially coined
"DNA colonies", are formed. To determine the sequence, four types of
reversible terminator bases (RT-bases) are added and non-incorporated
nucleotides are washed away. Unlike pyrosequencing, the DNA chains are
extended one nucleotide at a time and image acquisition can be performed at a
delayed moment, allowing for very large arrays of DNA colonies to be captured
by sequential images taken from a single camera. Decoupling the enzymatic
reaction and the image capture allows for optimal throughput and theoretically
unlimited sequencing capacity; with an optimal configuration, the ultimate
throughput of the instrument depends only on the [A/D conversion](/wiki
/Analog-to-digital_converter) rate of the camera. The camera takes images of
the [fluorescently labeled](/wiki/Fluorescent_labeling) nucleotides, then the
dye along with the terminal 3' blocker is chemically removed from the DNA,
allowing the next cycle.[59] An alternative approach, [ion semiconductor
sequencing](/wiki/Ion_semiconductor_sequencing), is based on standard DNA
replication chemistry. This technology measures the release of a hydrogen ion
each time a base is incorporated. A microwell containing template DNA is
flooded with a single [nucleotide](/wiki/Nucleotide), if the nucleotide is
complementary to the template strand it will be incorporated and a hydrogen
ion will be released. This release triggers an [ISFET](/wiki/ISFET) ion
sensor. If a [homopolymer](/wiki/Homopolymer) is present in the template
sequence multiple nucleotides will be incorporated in a single flood cycle,
and the detected electrical signal will be proportionally higher.[60] ###
Assembly[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=11)] Main
article: [Sequence assembly](/wiki/Sequence_assembly)
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/PET_contig_scaffold.pn
g/300px-PET_contig_scaffold.png) Overlapping reads form contigs; contigs and
gaps of known length form scaffolds.
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2e/Mapping_Reads.png
/300px-Mapping_Reads.png) Paired end reads of next generation sequencing data
mapped to a reference genome. Multiple, fragmented sequence reads must be
assembled together on the basis of their overlapping areas. [Sequence
assembly](/wiki/Sequence_assembly) refers to
[aligning](/wiki/Sequence_alignment) and merging fragments of a much longer
[DNA](/wiki/DNA) sequence in order to reconstruct the original sequence.[6]
This is needed as current [DNA sequencing](/wiki/DNA_sequencing) technology
cannot read whole genomes as a continuous sequence, but rather reads small
pieces of between 20 and 1000 bases, depending on the technology used. Third
generation sequencing technologies such as PacBio or Oxford Nanopore routinely
generate sequenceing reads >10 kb in length; however, they have a high error
rate at approximately 15 percent.[61][62] Typically the short fragments,
called reads, result from [shotgun sequencing](/wiki/Shotgun_sequencing)
[genomic](/wiki/Genome) DNA, or [gene
transcripts](/wiki/Transcription_\\(genetics\\))
([ESTs](/wiki/Expressed_sequence_tag)).[6] #### Assembly
approaches[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=12)]
Assembly can be broadly categorized into two approaches: _de novo_ assembly,
for genomes which are not similar to any sequenced in the past, and
comparative assembly, which uses the existing sequence of a closely related
organism as a reference during assembly.[50] Relative to comparative assembly,
_de novo_ assembly is computationally difficult ([NP-hard](/wiki/NP-hard)),
making it less favourable for short-read NGS technologies. Within the _de
novo_ assembly paradigm there are two primary strategies for assembly,
Eulerian path strategies, and overlap-layout-consensus (OLC) strategies. OLC
strategies ultimately try to create a Hamiltonian path through an overlap
graph which is an NP-hard problem. Eulerian path strategies are
computationally more tractable because they try to find a Eulerian path
through a deBruijn graph.[50] ####
Finishing[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=13)]
Finished genomes are defined as having a single contiguous sequence with no
ambiguities representing each [replicon](/wiki/Replicon_\\(genetics\\)).[63]
### Annotation[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=14)]
Main article: [Genome annotation](/wiki/Genome_annotation) The DNA sequence
assembly alone is of little value without additional analysis.[6] [Genome
annotation](/wiki/Genome_annotation) is the process of attaching biological
information to [sequences](/wiki/DNA_sequence), and consists of three main
steps:[64] 1\. identifying portions of the genome that do not code for
proteins 2\. identifying elements on the [genome](/wiki/Genome), a process
called [gene prediction](/wiki/Gene_prediction), and 3\. attaching biological
information to these elements. Automatic annotation tools try to perform these
steps _[in silico](/wiki/In_silico)_, as opposed to manual annotation (a.k.a.
curation) which involves human expertise and potential experimental
verification.[65] Ideally, these approaches co-exist and complement each other
in the same annotation [pipeline](/wiki/Pipeline_\\(computing\\)) (also see
[below](/wiki/Genomics#Sequencing_pipelines)). Traditionally, the basic level
of annotation is using [BLAST](/wiki/BLAST) for finding similarities, and then
annotating genomes based on homologues.[6] More recently, additional
information is added to the annotation platform. The additional information
allows manual annotators to deconvolute discrepancies between genes that are
given the same annotation. Some databases use genome context information,
similarity scores, experimental data, and integrations of other resources to
provide genome annotations through their Subsystems approach. Other databases
(e.g. [Ensembl](/wiki/Ensembl)) rely on both curated data sources as well as a
range of software tools in their automated genome annotation pipeline.[66]
_Structural annotation_ consists of the identification of genomic elements,
primarily [ORFs](/wiki/Open_reading_frame) and their localisation, or gene
structure. _Functional annotation_ consists of attaching biological
information to genomic elements. ### Sequencing pipelines and
databases[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=15)] The
need for reproducibility and efficient management of the large amount of data
associated with genome projects mean that [computational
pipelines](/wiki/Pipeline_\\(software\\)) have important applications in
genomics.[67] ## Research
areas[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=16)] ###
Functional
genomics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=17)] Main
article: [Functional genomics](/wiki/Functional_genomics) [Functional
genomics](/wiki/Functional_genomics) is a field of [molecular
biology](/wiki/Molecular_biology) that attempts to make use of the vast wealth
of data produced by genomic projects (such as [genome sequencing
projects](/wiki/Genome_project)) to describe [gene](/wiki/Gene) (and
[protein](/wiki/Protein)) functions and interactions. Functional genomics
focuses on the dynamic aspects such as gene
[transcription](/wiki/Transcription_\\(genetics\\)),
[translation](/wiki/Translation_\\(biology\\)), and [protein–protein
interactions](/wiki/Protein%E2%80%93protein_interaction), as opposed to the
static aspects of the genomic information such as [DNA
sequence](/wiki/DNA_sequence) or structures. Functional genomics attempts to
answer questions about the function of DNA at the levels of genes, RNA
transcripts, and protein products. A key characteristic of functional genomics
studies is their genome-wide approach to these questions, generally involving
high-throughput methods rather than a more traditional “gene-by-gene”
approach. A major branch of genomics is still concerned with
[sequencing](/wiki/Sequencing) the genomes of various organisms, but the
knowledge of full genomes has created the possibility for the field of
[functional genomics](/wiki/Functional_genomics), mainly concerned with
patterns of [gene expression](/wiki/Gene_expression) during various
conditions. The most important tools here are [microarrays](/wiki/Microarray)
and [bioinformatics](/wiki/Bioinformatics). ### Structural
genomics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=18)] Main
article: [Structural genomics](/wiki/Structural_genomics)
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/86/Argonne%27s_Midwest_Ce
nter_for_Structural_Genomics_deposits_1%2C000th_protein_structure.jpg/300px-Ar
gonne%27s_Midwest_Center_for_Structural_Genomics_deposits_1%2C000th_protein_st
ructure.jpg) An example of a protein structure determined by the Midwest
Center for Structural Genomics. [Structural
genomics](/wiki/Structural_genomics) seeks to describe the [3-dimensional
structure](/wiki/Protein_Structure) of every protein encoded by a given
[genome](/wiki/Genome).[68][69] This genome-based approach allows for a high-
throughput method of structure determination by a combination of [experimental
and modeling approaches](/wiki/Protein_structure_prediction). The principal
difference between structural genomics and [traditional structural
prediction](/wiki/Protein_structure_prediction) is that structural genomics
attempts to determine the structure of every protein encoded by the genome,
rather than focusing on one particular protein. With full-genome sequences
available, structure prediction can be done more quickly through a combination
of experimental and modeling approaches, especially because the availability
of large numbers of sequenced genomes and previously solved protein structures
allow scientists to model protein structure on the structures of previously
solved homologs. Structural genomics involves taking a large number of
approaches to structure determination, including experimental methods using
genomic sequences or modeling-based approaches based on sequence or
[structural homology](/wiki/Homology_modeling) to a protein of known structure
or based on chemical and physical principles for a protein with no homology to
any known structure. As opposed to traditional [structural
biology](/wiki/Structural_biology), the determination of a [protein
structure](/wiki/Protein_structure) through a structural genomics effort often
(but not always) comes before anything is known regarding the protein
function. This raises new challenges in [structural
bioinformatics](/wiki/Structural_bioinformatics), i.e. determining protein
function from its [3D](/wiki/Three-dimensional_space) structure.[70] ###
Epigenomics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=19)] Main
article: [Epigenomics](/wiki/Epigenomics) [Epigenomics](/wiki/Epigenomics) is
the study of the complete set of [epigenetic](/wiki/Epigenetic) modifications
on the genetic material of a cell, known as the
[epigenome](/wiki/Epigenome).[71] Epigenetic modifications are reversible
modifications on a cell's DNA or histones that affect gene expression without
altering the DNA sequence (Russell 2010 p. 475). Two of the most characterized
epigenetic modifications are [DNA methylation](/wiki/DNA_methylation) and
[histone
modification](/wiki/Epigenetics#DNA_methylation_and_chromatin_remodeling).
Epigenetic modifications play an important role in gene expression and
regulation, and are involved in numerous cellular processes such as in
[differentiation/development](/wiki/Epigenetics#Development) and
[tumorigenesis](/wiki/Epigenetics#Cancer_and_developmental_abnormalities).[71]
The study of epigenetics on a global level has been made possible only
recently through the adaptation of genomic high-throughput assays.[72] ###
Metagenomics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=20)]
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/Environmental_shotgun_
sequencing.png/170px-Environmental_shotgun_sequencing.png) Environmental
Shotgun Sequencing (ESS) is a key technique in metagenomics. (A) Sampling from
habitat; (B) filtering particles, typically by size; (C) Lysis and DNA
extraction; (D) cloning and library construction; (E) sequencing the clones;
(F) sequence assembly into contigs and scaffolds. Main article:
[Metagenomics](/wiki/Metagenomics) [Metagenomics](/wiki/Metagenomics) is the
study of _metagenomes_, [genetic](/wiki/Genetics) material recovered directly
from [environmental](/wiki/Natural_environment) samples. The broad field may
also be referred to as environmental genomics, ecogenomics or community
genomics. While traditional [microbiology](/wiki/Microbiology) and microbial
[genome sequencing](/wiki/Genome_sequencing) rely upon cultivated
[clonal](/wiki/Clone_\\(genetics\\))
[cultures](/wiki/Microbiological_culture), early environmental gene sequencing
cloned specific genes (often the [16S rRNA](/wiki/16S_ribosomal_RNA) gene) to
produce a [profile of diversity](/wiki/Microbial_ecology) in a natural sample.
Such work revealed that the vast majority of [microbial
biodiversity](/wiki/Biodiversity) had been missed by [cultivation-
based](/wiki/Microbiological_culture) methods.[73] Recent studies use
"shotgun" [Sanger sequencing](/wiki/Chain_termination_method) or massively
parallel [pyrosequencing](/wiki/Pyrosequencing) to get largely unbiased
samples of all genes from all the members of the sampled communities.[74]
Because of its power to reveal the previously hidden diversity of microscopic
life, metagenomics offers a powerful lens for viewing the microbial world that
has the potential to revolutionize understanding of the entire living
world.[75][76] ### Model
systems[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=21)] ####
Viruses and
bacteriophages[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=22)]
[Bacteriophages](/wiki/Bacteriophage) have played and continue to play a key
role in bacterial [genetics](/wiki/Genetics) and [molecular
biology](/wiki/Molecular_biology). Historically, they were used to define
[gene](/wiki/Gene) structure and gene regulation. Also the first
[genome](/wiki/Genome) to be sequenced was a
[bacteriophage](/wiki/Bacteriophage). However, bacteriophage research did not
lead the genomics revolution, which is clearly dominated by bacterial
genomics. Only very recently has the study of bacteriophage genomes become
prominent, thereby enabling researchers to understand the mechanisms
underlying [phage](/wiki/Phage) evolution. Bacteriophage genome sequences can
be obtained through direct sequencing of isolated bacteriophages, but can also
be derived as part of microbial genomes. Analysis of bacterial genomes has
shown that a substantial amount of microbial DNA consists of
[prophage](/wiki/Prophage) sequences and prophage-like elements.[77] A
detailed database mining of these sequences offers insights into the role of
prophages in shaping the bacterial genome: Overall, this method verified many
known bacteriophage groups, making this a useful tool for predicting the
relationships of prophages from bacterial genomes.[78][79] ####
Cyanobacteria[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=23)] At
present there are 24 [cyanobacteria](/wiki/Cyanobacteria) for which a total
genome sequence is available. 15 of these cyanobacteria come from the marine
environment. These are six _[Prochlorococcus](/wiki/Prochlorococcus)_ strains,
seven marine _[Synechococcus](/wiki/Synechococcus)_ strains, _[Trichodesmium
erythraeum](/wiki/Trichodesmium_erythraeum)_ IMS101 and _[Crocosphaera
watsonii](/wiki/Crocosphaera_watsonii)_
[WH8501](/w/index.php?title=WH8501&action;=edit&redlink;=1). Several studies
have demonstrated how these sequences could be used very successfully to infer
important ecological and physiological characteristics of marine
cyanobacteria. However, there are many more genome projects currently in
progress, amongst those there are further
_[Prochlorococcus](/wiki/Prochlorococcus)_ and marine
_[Synechococcus](/wiki/Synechococcus)_ isolates,
_[Acaryochloris](/wiki/Acaryochloris)_ and _[Prochloron](/wiki/Prochloron)_,
the N2-fixing filamentous cyanobacteria _[Nodularia
spumigena](/w/index.php?title=Nodularia_spumigena&action;=edit&redlink;=1)_,
_[Lyngbya
aestuarii](/w/index.php?title=Lyngbya_aestuarii&action;=edit&redlink;=1)_ and
_[Lyngbya majuscula](/wiki/Lyngbya_majuscula)_, as well as
[bacteriophages](/wiki/Bacteriophage) infecting marine cyanobaceria. Thus, the
growing body of genome information can also be tapped in a more general way to
address global problems by applying a comparative approach. Some new and
exciting examples of progress in this field are the identification of genes
for regulatory RNAs, insights into the evolutionary origin of
[photosynthesis](/wiki/Photosynthesis), or estimation of the contribution of
[horizontal gene transfer](/wiki/Horizontal_gene_transfer) to the genomes that
have been analyzed.[80] ## Applications of
genomics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=24)]
Genomics has provided applications in many fields, including
[medicine](/wiki/Medicine), [biotechnology](/wiki/Biotechnology),
[anthropology](/wiki/Anthropology) and other [social
sciences](/wiki/Social_sciences).[40] ### Genomic
medicine[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=25)] Next-
generation genomic technologies allow clinicians and biomedical researchers to
drastically increase the amount of genomic data collected on large study
populations.[81] When combined with new informatics approaches that integrate
many kinds of data with genomic data in disease research, this allows
researchers to better understand the genetic bases of drug response and
disease.[82][83] For example, the _All of Us_ research program aims to collect
genome sequence data from 1 million participants to become a critical
component of the precision medicine research platform.[84] ### Synthetic
biology and
bioengineering[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=26)]
The growth of genomic knowledge has enabled increasingly sophisticated
applications of [synthetic biology](/wiki/Synthetic_biology).[85] In 2010
researchers at the [J. Craig Venter
Institute](/wiki/J._Craig_Venter_Institute) announced the creation of a
partially synthetic species of [bacterium](/wiki/Bacterium), _[Mycoplasma
laboratorium](/wiki/Mycoplasma_laboratorium)_, derived from the
[genome](/wiki/Genome) of _[Mycoplasma
genitalium](/wiki/Mycoplasma_genitalium)_.[86] ### Conservation
genomics[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=27)]
Conservationists can use the information gathered by genomic sequencing in
order to better evaluate genetic factors key to species conservation, such as
the [genetic diversity](/wiki/Genetic_diversity) of a population or whether an
individual is heterozygous for a recessive inherited genetic disorder.[87] By
using genomic data to evaluate the effects of [evolutionary
processes](/wiki/Evolutionary_process) and to detect patterns in variation
throughout a given population, conservationists can formulate plans to aid a
given species without as many variables left unknown as those unaddressed by
standard [genetic approaches](/wiki/Conservation_genetics).[88] ## See
also[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=28)] * ![icon](/
/upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2d/Issoria_lathonia.jpg/32px-
Issoria_lathonia.jpg)[Biology portal](/wiki/Portal:Biology) * [Cognitive
genomics](/wiki/Cognitive_genomics) * [Computational
genomics](/wiki/Computational_genomics) * [Epigenomics](/wiki/Epigenomics) *
[Functional genomics](/wiki/Functional_genomics) *
[GeneCalling](/wiki/GeneCalling), an mRNA profiling technology * [Genomics of
domestication](/wiki/Genomics_of_domestication) * [Genetics in
fiction](/wiki/Genetics_in_fiction) * [Glycomics](/wiki/Glycomics) *
[Immunomics](/wiki/Immunomics) * [Metagenomics](/wiki/Metagenomics) *
[Pathogenomics](/wiki/Pathogenomics) * [Personal
genomics](/wiki/Personal_genomics) * [Proteomics](/wiki/Proteomics) *
[Transcriptomics](/wiki/Transcriptomics) *
[Psychogenomics](/wiki/Psychogenomics) * [Whole genome
sequencing](/wiki/Whole_genome_sequencing) * [Thomas
Roderick](/wiki/Thomas_Roderick) ##
References[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=29)] 1\.
**^** ["WHO definitions of genetics and
genomics"](https://www.who.int/genomics/geneticsVSgenomics/en/). World Health
Organization. 2\. **^** National Human Genome Research Institute (8 November
2010). ["A Brief Guide to Genomics"](http://www.genome.gov/19016904).
_Genome.gov_. Retrieved 2011-12-03. 3\. **^** _Concepts of genetics_ (10th
ed.). San Francisco: Pearson Education. 2012.
[ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-321-72412-0](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-321-72412-0). 4\. **^**
Culver KW, Labow MA (8 November 2002).
["Genomics"](https://archive.org/details/genetics0000unse). In Robinson R
(ed.). _Genetics_. Macmillan Science Library. Macmillan Reference USA.
[ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-02-865606-9](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-02-865606-9). 5\. **^**
Kadakkuzha BM, Puthanveettil SV (July 2013). ["Genomics and proteomics in
solving brain complexity"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6425491).
_Molecular BioSystems_. **9** (7): 1807–21. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):
[10.1039/C3MB25391K](https://doi.org/10.1039%2FC3MB25391K).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[6425491](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6425491).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[23615871](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23615871). 6\. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ Pevsner J (2009).
_[Bioinformatics and functional
genomics_](https://archive.org/details/bioinformaticsfu00pevs_0) (2nd ed.).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-470-08585-1](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-470-08585-1). 7\. **^**
Liddell HG, Scott R (1889). _[Intermediate Greek-English Lexicon γίγνομαι_](ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20180620231907/http://openlitreview.com/index.php/Ge
netic_engineering). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-1-61427-397-4](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-61427-397-4). Archived
from [the original](http://openlitreview.com/index.php/Genetic_engineering) on
2018-06-20. Retrieved 2015-05-13. 8\. **^** ["Genome,
n"](http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/7761). _Oxford English Dictionary_ (Third
ed.). Oxford University Press. 2008. Retrieved 2012-12-01.(subscription
required) 9\. **^** Yadav SP (December 2007). ["The wholeness in suffix
-omics, -omes, and the word
om"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2392988). _Journal of Biomolecular
Techniques_. **18** (5): 277. [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[2392988](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2392988).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[18166670](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18166670). 10\. **^** Ankeny RA (June
2003). "Sequencing the genome from nematode to human: changing methods,
changing science". _Endeavour_. **27** (2): 87–92. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifi
er\\)):[10.1016/S0160-9327(03)00061-9](https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0160-9327%28
03%2900061-9). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[12798815](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12798815). 11\. **^** Holley RW, Everett
GA, Madison JT, Zamir A (May 1965). ["Nucleotide sequences in the yeast
alanine transfer ribonucleic
acid"](http://www.jbc.org/content/240/5/2122.full.pdf) (PDF). _The Journal of
Biological Chemistry_. **240** (5): 2122–8.
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[14299636](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14299636). 12\. **^** Holley RW, Apgar J,
Everett GA, Madison JT, Marquisee M, Merrill SH, Penswick JR, Zamir A (March
1965). "Structure of a ribonucleic acid". _Science_. **147** (3664): 1462–5. [
Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1965Sci...147.1462H](https://ui.adsa
bs.harvard.edu/abs/1965Sci...147.1462H). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10
.1126/science.147.3664.1462](https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.147.3664.1462).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[14263761](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14263761).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[40989800](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:40989800). 13\. **^**
Nirenberg M, Leder P, Bernfield M, Brimacombe R, Trupin J, Rottman F, O'Neal C
(May 1965). ["RNA codewords and protein synthesis, VII. On the general nature
of the RNA code"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC301388). _Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_. **53**
(5): 1161–8. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1965PNAS...53.1161N](h
ttps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1965PNAS...53.1161N). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(iden
tifier\\)):[10.1073/pnas.53.5.1161](https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.53.5.1161).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[301388](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC301388).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[5330357](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5330357). 14\. **^** Min Jou W, Haegeman
G, Ysebaert M, Fiers W (May 1972). "Nucleotide sequence of the gene coding for
the bacteriophage MS2 coat protein". _Nature_. **237** (5350): 82–8. [Bibcode]
(/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1972Natur.237...82J](https://ui.adsabs.harva
rd.edu/abs/1972Natur.237...82J). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/23
7082a0](https://doi.org/10.1038%2F237082a0).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[4555447](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/4555447).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[4153893](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4153893). 15\. **^** Fiers
W, Contreras R, Duerinck F, Haegeman G, Iserentant D, Merregaert J, et al.
(April 1976). "Complete nucleotide sequence of bacteriophage MS2 RNA: primary
and secondary structure of the replicase gene". _Nature_. **260** (5551):
500–7. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1976Natur.260..500F](https:/
/ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1976Natur.260..500F). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier
\\)):[10.1038/260500a0](https://doi.org/10.1038%2F260500a0).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[1264203](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1264203).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[4289674](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4289674). 16\. **^** Fiers
W, Contreras R, Haegemann G, Rogiers R, Van de Voorde A, Van Heuverswyn H, Van
Herreweghe J, Volckaert G, Ysebaert M (May 1978). "Complete nucleotide
sequence of SV40 DNA". _Nature_. **273** (5658): 113–20. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibco
de_\\(identifier\\)):[1978Natur.273..113F](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1
978Natur.273..113F). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/273113a0](http
s://doi.org/10.1038%2F273113a0). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[205802](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/205802).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[1634424](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1634424). 17\. **^**
Tamarin RH (2004). _Principles of genetics_ (7 ed.). London: McGraw Hill.
[ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-07-124320-9](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-07-124320-9). 18\. **^**
Sanger F (1980). ["Nobel lecture: Determination of nucleotide sequences in
DNA"](http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/1980/sanger-
lecture.pdf) (PDF). Nobelprize.org. Retrieved 2010-10-18. 19\. ^ _**a**_
_**b**_ Sanger F, Air GM, Barrell BG, Brown NL, Coulson AR, Fiddes CA,
Hutchison CA, Slocombe PM, Smith M (February 1977). "Nucleotide sequence of
bacteriophage phi X174 DNA". _Nature_. **265** (5596): 687–95. [Bibcode](/wiki
/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1977Natur.265..687S](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu
/abs/1977Natur.265..687S). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/265687a0
](https://doi.org/10.1038%2F265687a0). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[870828](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/870828).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[4206886](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4206886). 20\. **^** Kaiser
O, Bartels D, Bekel T, Goesmann A, Kespohl S, Pühler A, Meyer F (December
2003). "Whole genome shotgun sequencing guided by bioinformatics pipelines--an
optimized approach for an established technique". _Journal of Biotechnology_.
**106** (2–3): 121–33. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1016/j.jbiotec.20
03.08.008](https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jbiotec.2003.08.008).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[14651855](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14651855). 21\. **^** Sanger F, Nicklen
S, Coulson AR (December 1977). ["DNA sequencing with chain-terminating
inhibitors"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC431765). _Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_. **74**
(12): 5463–7. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1977PNAS...74.5463S](
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1977PNAS...74.5463S). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(ide
ntifier\\)):[10.1073/pnas.74.12.5463](https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.74.12.546
3). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[431765](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC431765).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[271968](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/271968). 22\. **^** Maxam AM, Gilbert W
(February 1977). ["A new method for sequencing
DNA"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC392330). _Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_. **74** (2):
560–4. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1977PNAS...74..560M](https:/
/ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1977PNAS...74..560M). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier
\\)):[10.1073/pnas.74.2.560](https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.74.2.560).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[392330](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC392330).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[265521](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/265521). 23\. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Darden L,
James Tabery (2010). ["Molecular
Biology"](http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2010/entries/molecular-
biology/). In Zalta EN (ed.). _The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy_ (Fall
2010 ed.). 24\. **^** Anderson S, Bankier AT, Barrell BG, de Bruijn MH,
Coulson AR, Drouin J, et al. (April 1981). "Sequence and organization of the
human mitochondrial genome". _Nature_. **290** (5806): 457–65. [Bibcode](/wiki
/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1981Natur.290..457A](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu
/abs/1981Natur.290..457A). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/290457a0
](https://doi.org/10.1038%2F290457a0). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[7219534](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7219534).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[4355527](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4355527).(subscription
required) 25\. **^** Shinozaki K, Ohme M, Tanaka M, Wakasugi T, Hayashida N,
Matsubayashi T, et al. (September 1986). ["The complete nucleotide sequence of
the tobacco chloroplast genome: its gene organization and
expression"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1167080). _The EMBO
Journal_. **5** (9): 2043–2049. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1002/j.1
460-2075.1986.tb04464.x](https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fj.1460-2075.1986.tb04464.x)
. [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[1167080](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1167080).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[16453699](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16453699). 26\. **^** Ohyama K, Fukuzawa
H, Kohchi T, Shirai H, Sano T, Sano S, et al. (1986). "Chloroplast gene
organization deduced from complete sequence of liverwort Marchantia polymorpha
chloroplast DNA". _Nature_. **322** (6079): 572–574. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\
\(identifier\\)):[1986Natur.322..572O](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1986N
atur.322..572O). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/322572a0](https://
doi.org/10.1038%2F322572a0). [S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[4311952](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4311952). 27\. **^**
[Oliver SG](/wiki/Stephen_Oliver_\\(scientist\\)), van der Aart QJ, Agostoni-
Carbone ML, Aigle M, Alberghina L, Alexandraki D, Antoine G, Anwar R, Ballesta
JP, Benit P (May 1992). "The complete DNA sequence of yeast chromosome III".
_Nature_. **357** (6373): 38–46. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[19
92Natur.357...38O](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1992Natur.357...38O). [do
i](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/357038a0](https://doi.org/10.1038%2F35
7038a0). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[1574125](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1574125).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[4271784](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4271784). 28\. **^**
Fleischmann RD, Adams MD, White O, Clayton RA, Kirkness EF, Kerlavage AR, et
al. (July 1995). "Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of Haemophilus
influenzae Rd". _Science_. **269** (5223): 496–512. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\
(identifier\\)):[1995Sci...269..496F](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995Sc
i...269..496F). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1126/science.7542800](ht
tps://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.7542800). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[7542800](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7542800).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[10423613](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10423613). 29\. **^**
Goffeau A, Barrell BG, Bussey H, Davis RW, Dujon B, Feldmann H, Galibert F,
Hoheisel JD, Jacq C, Johnston M, Louis EJ, Mewes HW, Murakami Y, Philippsen P,
Tettelin H, Oliver SG (October 1996). "Life with 6000 genes". _Science_.
**274** (5287): 546, 563–7. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[1996Sci
...274..546G](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1996Sci...274..546G). [doi](/w
iki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1126/science.274.5287.546](https://doi.org/10.11
26%2Fscience.274.5287.546). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[8849441](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8849441).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[211123134](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:211123134).(subscription
required) 30\. **^** ["Complete genomes:
Viruses"](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/GenomesGroup.cgi?taxid=10239).
_NCBI_. 17 November 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-18. 31\. **^** ["Genome Project
Statistics"](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/static/gpstat.html). _Entrez
Genome Project_. 7 October 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-18. 32\. **^** Zimmer C (29
December 2009). ["Scientists Start a Genomic Catalog of Earth's Abundant
Microbes"](https://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/29/science/29microbes.html). _The
New York Times_. [ISSN](/wiki/ISSN_\\(identifier\\))
[0362-4331](//www.worldcat.org/issn/0362-4331). Retrieved 2012-12-21. 33\.
**^** Wu D, Hugenholtz P, Mavromatis K, Pukall R, Dalin E, Ivanova NN, et al.
(December 2009). ["A phylogeny-driven genomic encyclopaedia of Bacteria and
Archaea"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3073058). _Nature_. **462**
(7276): 1056–60. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[2009Natur.462.1056
W](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009Natur.462.1056W). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(
identifier\\)):[10.1038/nature08656](https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature08656).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3073058](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3073058).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[20033048](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20033048). 34\. **^** ["Human gene number
slashed"](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3760766.stm). _BBC_. 20
October 2004. Retrieved 2012-12-21. 35\. **^** Yue GH, Lo LC, Zhu ZY, Lin G,
Feng F (April 2006). "The complete nucleotide sequence of the mitochondrial
genome of Tetraodon nigroviridis". _DNA Sequence_. **17** (2): 115–21. [doi](/
wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1080/10425170600700378](https://doi.org/10.1080
%2F10425170600700378). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[17076253](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17076253).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[21797344](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:21797344). 36\. **^**
[National Human Genome Research
Institute](/wiki/National_Human_Genome_Research_Institute) (14 July 2004).
["Dog Genome Assembled: Canine Genome Now Available to Research Community
Worldwide"](http://www.genome.gov/12511476). _Genome.gov_. Retrieved
2012-01-20. 37\. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ McElheny V (2010). _[Drawing the map of
life : inside the Human Genome
Project_](https://archive.org/details/drawingmapoflife0000mcel). New York NY:
Basic Books. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-465-04333-0](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-465-04333-0). 38\. **^**
Abecasis GR, Auton A, Brooks LD, DePristo MA, Durbin RM, Handsaker RE, Kang
HM, Marth GT, McVean GA (November 2012). ["An integrated map of genetic
variation from 1,092 human
genomes"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3498066). _Nature_. **491**
(7422): 56–65. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[2012Natur.491...56T]
(https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012Natur.491...56T). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(id
entifier\\)):[10.1038/nature11632](https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature11632).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3498066](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3498066).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[23128226](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23128226). 39\. **^** Nielsen R (October
2010). ["Genomics: In search of rare human
variants"](https://doi.org/10.1038/4671050a). _Nature_. **467** (7319):
1050–1. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[2010Natur.467.1050N](https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010Natur.467.1050N). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifie
r\\)):[10.1038/4671050a](https://doi.org/10.1038%2F4671050a).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[20981085](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20981085). 40\. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Barnes
B, Dupré J (2008). _Genomes and what to make of them_. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-226-17295-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-226-17295-8). 41\. **^**
Eisen JA (July 2012). ["Badomics words and the power and peril of the ome-
meme"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3617454). _GigaScience_. **1**
(1): 6. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1186/2047-217X-1-6](https://doi.
org/10.1186%2F2047-217X-1-6). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3617454](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3617454).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[23587201](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23587201). 42\. **^** Hotz RL (13 August
2012). ["Here"s an Omical Tale: Scientists Discover Spreading Suffix"](https:/
/www.wsj.com/articles/SB10000872396390444840104577551433143153716). _Wall
Street Journal_. [ISSN](/wiki/ISSN_\\(identifier\\))
[0099-9660](//www.worldcat.org/issn/0099-9660). Retrieved 2013-01-04. 43\.
**^** Scudellari M (1 October 2011). ["Data Deluge"](http://www.the-
scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/31212/title/Data-Deluge/). _The
Scientist_. Retrieved 2013-01-04. 44\. **^** Chaston J, Douglas AE (August
2012). ["Making the most of "omics" for symbiosis
research"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3491573). _The Biological
Bulletin_. **223** (1): 21–9. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1086/BBLv2
23n1p21](https://doi.org/10.1086%2FBBLv223n1p21).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3491573](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3491573).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[22983030](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22983030). 45\. **^** McCutcheon JP, von
Dohlen CD (August 2011). ["An interdependent metabolic patchwork in the nested
symbiosis of mealybugs"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3169327).
_Current Biology_. **21** (16): 1366–72. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10
.1016/j.cub.2011.06.051](https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2011.06.051).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3169327](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3169327).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[21835622](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21835622). 46\. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Baker M
(14 September 2012). ["Benchtop sequencers ship
off"](http://blogs.nature.com/news/2012/09/benchtop-sequencers-ship-off.html)
(Blog). _Nature News Blog_. Retrieved 2012-12-22. 47\. **^** Quail MA, Smith
M, Coupland P, Otto TD, Harris SR, Connor TR, Bertoni A, Swerdlow HP, Gu Y
(July 2012). ["A tale of three next generation sequencing platforms:
comparison of Ion Torrent, Pacific Biosciences and Illumina MiSeq
sequencers"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3431227). _BMC Genomics_.
**13**: 341. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1186/1471-2164-13-341](http
s://doi.org/10.1186%2F1471-2164-13-341). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3431227](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3431227).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[22827831](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22827831). 48\. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Staden
R (June 1979). ["A strategy of DNA sequencing employing computer
programs"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC327874). _Nucleic Acids
Research_. **6** (7): 2601–10. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1093/nar/
6.7.2601](https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fnar%2F6.7.2601).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[327874](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC327874).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[461197](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/461197). 49\. **^** Anderson S (July 1981).
["Shotgun DNA sequencing using cloned DNase I-generated
fragments"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC327328). _Nucleic Acids
Research_. **9** (13): 3015–27. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1093/nar
/9.13.3015](https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fnar%2F9.13.3015).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[327328](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC327328).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[6269069](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6269069). 50\. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
Pop M (July 2009). ["Genome assembly reborn: recent computational
challenges"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2691937). _Briefings in
Bioinformatics_. **10** (4): 354–66. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.109
3/bib/bbp026](https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbib%2Fbbp026).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[2691937](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2691937).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[19482960](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19482960). 51\. **^** Sanger F, Coulson
AR (May 1975). "A rapid method for determining sequences in DNA by primed
synthesis with DNA polymerase". _Journal of Molecular Biology_. **94** (3):
441–8. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1016/0022-2836(75)90213-2](https:
//doi.org/10.1016%2F0022-2836%2875%2990213-2).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[1100841](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1100841). 52\. **^** Mavromatis K, Land
ML, Brettin TS, Quest DJ, Copeland A, Clum A, et al. (2012). Liu Z (ed.).
["The fast changing landscape of sequencing technologies and their impact on
microbial genome assemblies and
annotation"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3520994). _PLOS ONE_.
**7** (12): e48837. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[2012PLoSO...748
837M](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012PLoSO...748837M). [doi](/wiki/Doi_
\\(identifier\\)):[10.1371/journal.pone.0048837](https://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjou
rnal.pone.0048837). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3520994](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3520994).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[23251337](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23251337). 53\. **^** Illumina, Inc. (28
February 2012). _[An Introduction to Next-Generation Sequencing Technology_](h
ttp://www.illumina.com/Documents/products/Illumina_Sequencing_Introduction.pdf
) (PDF). San Diego, California, USA: Illumina, Inc. p. 12. Retrieved
2012-12-28. 54\. **^** Hall N (May 2007). ["Advanced sequencing technologies
and their wider impact in microbiology"](https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.001370).
_The Journal of Experimental Biology_. **210** (Pt 9): 1518–25. [doi](/wiki/Do
i_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1242/jeb.001370](https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.001370)
. [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[17449817](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17449817). 55\. **^** Church GM (January
2006). "Genomes for all". _Scientific American_. **294** (1): 46–54. [Bibcode]
(/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[2006SciAm.294a..46C](https://ui.adsabs.harva
rd.edu/abs/2006SciAm.294a..46C). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/sc
ientificamerican0106-46](https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fscientificamerican0106-46).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[16468433](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16468433). 56\. **^** ten Bosch JR, Grody
WW (November 2008). ["Keeping up with the next generation: massively parallel
sequencing in clinical
diagnostics"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2570630). _The Journal of
Molecular Diagnostics_. **10** (6): 484–92. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):
[10.2353/jmoldx.2008.080027](https://doi.org/10.2353%2Fjmoldx.2008.080027).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[2570630](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2570630).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[18832462](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18832462). 57\. **^** Tucker T, Marra M,
Friedman JM (August 2009). ["Massively parallel sequencing: the next big thing
in genetic medicine"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2725244).
_American Journal of Human Genetics_. **85** (2): 142–54. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(i
dentifier\\)):[10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.022](https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.ajhg.20
09.06.022). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[2725244](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2725244).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[19679224](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19679224). 58\. **^** Kawashima EH,
Farinelli L, Mayer P (12 May 2005). ["Method of nucleic acid
amplification"](http://www.google.com/patents/US20050100900). Retrieved
2012-12-22. 59\. **^** Mardis ER (2008). ["Next-generation DNA sequencing meth
ods"](https://web.archive.org/web/20130518193940/http://www.lcg.unam.mx/fronti
ers/files/frontiers/annurev.genom.9.081307.164359.pdf) (PDF). _Annual Review
of Genomics and Human Genetics_. **9**: 387–402. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier
\\)):[10.1146/annurev.genom.9.081307.164359](https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev
.genom.9.081307.164359). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[18576944](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18576944). Archived from [the original](h
ttp://www.lcg.unam.mx/frontiers/files/frontiers/annurev.genom.9.081307.164359.
pdf) (PDF) on 2013-05-18. Retrieved 2013-01-04. 60\. **^** Davies K (2011).
["Powering Preventative Medicine"](http://www.bio-itworld.com/issues/2011
/sept-oct/powering-preventative-medicine.html). _Bio-IT World_
(September–October). 61\. **^**  62\. **^** ["Oxford Nanopore
Technologies"](https://nanoporetech.com/). 63\. **^** Chain PS, Grafham DV,
Fulton RS, Fitzgerald MG, Hostetler J, Muzny D, et al. (October 2009).
["Genomics. Genome project standards in a new era of
sequencing"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3854948). _Science_.
**326** (5950): 236–7. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(identifier\\)):[2009Sci...32
6..236C](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009Sci...326..236C). [doi](/wiki/D
oi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1126/science.1180614](https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscien
ce.1180614). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3854948](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3854948).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[19815760](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19815760). 64\. **^** Stein L (July
2001). "Genome annotation: from sequence to biology". _Nature Reviews.
Genetics_. **2** (7): 493–503. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/3508
0529](https://doi.org/10.1038%2F35080529). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[11433356](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11433356).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[12044602](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12044602). 65\. **^**
Brent MR (January 2008). ["Steady progress and recent breakthroughs in the
accuracy of automated genome annotation"](https://web.archive.org/web/20130529
013309/http://www.genomics.arizona.edu/553/Readings/2012/Brent_2008.pdf)
(PDF). _Nature Reviews. Genetics_. **9** (1): 62–73. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identi
fier\\)):[10.1038/nrg2220](https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnrg2220).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[18087260](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18087260).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[20412451](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:20412451). Archived from
[the
original](http://www.genomics.arizona.edu/553/Readings/2012/Brent_2008.pdf)
(PDF) on 2013-05-29. Retrieved 2013-01-04. 66\. **^** Flicek P, Ahmed I, Amode
MR, Barrell D, Beal K, Brent S, et al. (January 2013). ["Ensembl
2013"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3531136). _Nucleic Acids
Research_. **41** (Database issue): D48–55. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):
[10.1093/nar/gks1236](https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fnar%2Fgks1236).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[3531136](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3531136).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[23203987](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23203987). 67\. **^** Keith JM (2008).
Keith JM (ed.). _Bioinformatics_. Methods in Molecular Biology. **453**. pp.
v–vi. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1007/978-1-60327-429-6](https://do
i.org/10.1007%2F978-1-60327-429-6). [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-1-60327-428-9](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-60327-428-9).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[18720577](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18720577). 68\. **^** Marsden RL, Lewis
TA, Orengo CA (March 2007). ["Towards a comprehensive structural coverage of
completed genomes: a structural genomics
viewpoint"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1829165). _BMC
Bioinformatics_. **8**: 86. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1186/1471-21
05-8-86](https://doi.org/10.1186%2F1471-2105-8-86).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[1829165](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1829165).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[17349043](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17349043). 69\. **^** Brenner SE, Levitt
M (January 2000). ["Expectations from structural
genomics"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2144435). _Protein Science_.
**9** (1): 197–200. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1110/ps.9.1.197](htt
ps://doi.org/10.1110%2Fps.9.1.197). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[2144435](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2144435).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[10739263](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10739263). 70\. **^** Brenner SE (October
2001). ["A tour of structural
genomics"](http://compbio.berkeley.edu/people/brenner/pubs/brenner-2001-nrg-
strgen.pdf) (PDF). _Nature Reviews. Genetics_. **2** (10): 801–9. [doi](/wiki/
Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/35093574](https://doi.org/10.1038%2F35093574).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[11584296](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11584296).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[5656447](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5656447). 71\. ^ _**a**_
_**b**_ Francis RC (2011). _Epigenetics : the ultimate mystery of
inheritance_. New York: WW Norton. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-393-07005-7](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-393-07005-7). 72\. **^**
Laird PW (March 2010). "Principles and challenges of genomewide DNA
methylation analysis". _Nature Reviews. Genetics_. **11** (3): 191–203. [doi](
/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/nrg2732](https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnrg273
2). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[20125086](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20125086).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[6780101](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6780101). 73\. **^**
Hugenholtz P, Goebel BM, Pace NR (September 1998). ["Impact of culture-
independent studies on the emerging phylogenetic view of bacterial
diversity"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC107498). _Journal of
Bacteriology_. **180** (18): 4765–74. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.11
28/JB.180.18.4765-4774.1998](https://doi.org/10.1128%2FJB.180.18.4765-4774.199
8). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[107498](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC107498).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[9733676](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9733676). 74\. **^** Eisen JA (March
2007). ["Environmental shotgun sequencing: its potential and challenges for
studying the hidden world of
microbes"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1821061). _PLOS Biology_.
**5** (3): e82. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1371/journal.pbio.005008
2](https://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.0050082).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[1821061](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1821061).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[17355177](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17355177). 75\. **^** Marco D, ed.
(2010). _Metagenomics: Theory, Methods and Applications_. Caister Academic
Press. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-1-904455-54-7](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-904455-54-7). 76\. **^**
Marco D, ed. (2011). _Metagenomics: Current Innovations and Future Trends_.
[Caister Academic Press](/wiki/Caister_Academic_Press).
[ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-1-904455-87-5](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-904455-87-5). 77\. **^**
Canchaya C, Proux C, Fournous G, Bruttin A, Brüssow H (June 2003). ["Prophage
genomics"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC156470). _Microbiology and
Molecular Biology Reviews_. **67** (2): 238–76, table of contents. [doi](/wiki
/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1128/MMBR.67.2.238-276.2003](https://doi.org/10.112
8%2FMMBR.67.2.238-276.2003). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[156470](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC156470).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[12794192](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12794192). 78\. **^** McGrath S, van
Sinderen D, eds. (2007). _[Bacteriophage: Genetics and Molecular
Biology_](http://www.horizonpress.com/phage) (1st ed.). Caister Academic
Press. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-1-904455-14-1](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-904455-14-1). 79\. **^**
Fouts DE (November 2006). ["Phage_Finder: automated identification and
classification of prophage regions in complete bacterial genome
sequences"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1635311). _Nucleic Acids
Research_. **34** (20): 5839–51. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1093/na
r/gkl732](https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fnar%2Fgkl732).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[1635311](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1635311).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[17062630](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17062630). 80\. **^** Herrero A, Flores
E, eds. (2008). _[The Cyanobacteria: Molecular Biology, Genomics and
Evolution_](http://www.horizonpress.com/cyan) (1st ed.). Caister Academic
Press. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-1-904455-15-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-904455-15-8). 81\. **^**
Hudson KL (September 2011). "Genomics, health care, and society". _The New
England Journal of Medicine_. **365** (11): 1033–41. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identi
fier\\)):[10.1056/NEJMra1010517](https://doi.org/10.1056%2FNEJMra1010517).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[21916641](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21916641). 82\. **^** O'Donnell CJ, Nabel
EG (December 2011). "Genomics of cardiovascular disease". _The New England
Journal of Medicine_. **365** (22): 2098–109. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)
):[10.1056/NEJMra1105239](https://doi.org/10.1056%2FNEJMra1105239).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[22129254](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22129254). 83\. **^** Lu YF, Goldstein
DB, Angrist M, Cavalleri G (July 2014). ["Personalized medicine and human
genetic diversity"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4143101). _Cold
Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine_. **4** (9): a008581. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\
\(identifier\\)):[10.1101/cshperspect.a008581](https://doi.org/10.1101%2Fcshpe
rspect.a008581). [PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[4143101](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4143101).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[25059740](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25059740). 84\. **^** ["NIH-funded genome
centers to accelerate precision medicine discoveries"](https://www.nih.gov
/news-events/news-releases/nih-funded-genome-centers-accelerate-precision-
medicine-discoveries). _National Institutes of Health: All of Us Research
Program_. National Institutes of Health. 85\. **^** Church GM, Regis E (2012).
_Regenesis : how synthetic biology will reinvent nature and ourselves_. New
York: Basic Books. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-465-02175-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-465-02175-8). 86\. **^**
Baker M (May 2011). "Synthetic genomes: The next step for the synthetic
genome". _Nature_. **473** (7347): 403, 405–8. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode_\\(iden
tifier\\)):[2011Natur.473..403B](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011Natur.4
73..403B). [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/473403a](https://doi.org
/10.1038%2F473403a). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[21593873](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21593873).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[205064528](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:205064528). 87\. **^**
Frankham R (1 September 2010). "Challenges and opportunities of genetic
approaches to biological conservation". _Biological Conservation_. **143**
(9): 1922–1923. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1016/j.biocon.2010.05.01
1](https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.biocon.2010.05.011). 88\. **^** Allendorf FW,
Hohenlohe PA, Luikart G (October 2010). "Genomics and the future of
conservation genetics". _Nature Reviews. Genetics_. **11** (10): 697–709. [doi
](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1038/nrg2844](https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnrg2
844). [PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[20847747](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20847747).
[S2CID](/wiki/S2CID_\\(identifier\\))
[10811958](https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:10811958). ## Further
reading[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=30)] * Lesk
AM (2017). _Introduction to Genomics_ (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University
Press. p. 544\\. [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-0-19-107085-3](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-19-107085-3).
[ASIN](/wiki/ASIN_\\(identifier\\))
[0198754833](https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/0198754833). * Stunnenberg HG, Hubner
NC (2014). ["Genomics meets proteomics: identifying the culprits in
disease"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4021166). _Human Genetics_.
**133** (6): 689–700. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1007/s00439-013-13
76-2](https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs00439-013-1376-2).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[4021166](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4021166).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[24135908](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24135908). * Shibata T (2012). "Cancer
genomics and pathology: all together now". _Pathology International_. **62**
(10): 647–59. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1111/j.1440-1827.2012.0285
5.x](https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1440-1827.2012.02855.x).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[23005591](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23005591). * Roychowdhury S, Chinnaiyan
AM (2016). ["Translating cancer genomes and transcriptomes for precision
oncology"](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4713245). _CA: A Cancer
Journal for Clinicians_. **66** (1): 75–88. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):
[10.3322/caac.21329](https://doi.org/10.3322%2Fcaac.21329).
[PMC](/wiki/PMC_\\(identifier\\))
[4713245](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4713245).
[PMID](/wiki/PMID_\\(identifier\\))
[26528881](//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26528881). * Vadim N G, Zhang Y (2013).
"Chapter 16 Comparative Genomics Analysis of the Metallomes". In Banci L
(ed.). _Metallomics and the Cell_. Metal Ions in Life Sciences. **12**.
Springer. [doi](/wiki/Doi_\\(identifier\\)):[10.1007/978-94-007-5561-10_16](ht
tps://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-94-007-5561-10_16) (inactive 2020-08-25).
[ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-94-007-5560-4](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-94-007-5560-4). electronic-
book [ISBN](/wiki/ISBN_\\(identifier\\))
[978-94-007-5561-1](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-94-007-5561-1)
[ISSN](/wiki/ISSN_\\(identifier\\))
[1559-0836](https://www.worldcat.org/search?fq=x0:jrnl&q;=n2:1559-0836)
electronic-[ISSN](/wiki/ISSN_\\(identifier\\))
[1868-0402](https://www.worldcat.org/search?fq=x0:jrnl&q;=n2:1868-0402) ##
External links[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit&section;=31)] *
[Annual Review of Genomics and Human
Genetics](http://arjournals.annualreviews.org/loi/genom/) * [BMC
Genomics](http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcgenomics/): A BMC journal on
Genomics * [Genomics journal](http://www.elsevier.com/wps/find/journaldescript
ion.cws_home/622838/description#description) *
[Genomics.org](http://genomics.org): An openfree genomics portal. *
[NHGRI](http://www.genome.gov/): US government's genome institute * [JCVI
Comprehensive Microbial
Resource](http://arquivo.pt/wayback/20160516145036/http://cmr.jcvi.org/) * [Ko
reaGenome.org](https://www.webcitation.org/5hOBP0LmN?url=http://koreagenome.or
g/): The first Korean Genome published and the sequence is available freely. *
[GenomicsNetwork](https://web.archive.org/web/20171228195616/http://www.genomi
csnetwork.ac.uk/): Looks at the development and use of the science and
technologies of genomics. * [Institute for Genome Sciences](https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20091115214635/http://www.igs.umaryland.edu/research_topics.php):
Genomics research. * [MIT OpenCourseWare HST.512 Genomic
Medicine](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/health-sciences-and-technology/hst-512
-genomic-medicine-spring-2004/) A free, self-study course in genomic medicine.
Resources include audio lectures and selected lecture notes. * [ENCODE threads
explorer](http://www.nature.com/encode/#/threads/machine-learning-approaches-
to-genomics) Machine learning approaches to genomics. [Nature
(journal)](/wiki/Nature_\\(journal\\)) * [Global map of genomics laboratories]
(https://web.archive.org/web/20131005093407/https://mapsengine.google.com/map/
viewer?mid=zeHBUH4JmjxQ.kB0PwL4lW7VM) * [Genomics: Scitable by nature
education](http://www.nature.com/scitable/ebooks/genomics-4) *
[v](/wiki/Template:Genomics) * [t](/wiki/Template_talk:Genomics) *
[e](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Template:Genomics&action;=edit)
[Omics](/wiki/Omics) Genomics * [Cognitive genomics](/wiki/Cognitive_genomics)
* [Computational genomics](/wiki/Computational_genomics) * [Comparative
genomics](/wiki/Comparative_genomics) * [Functional
genomics](/wiki/Functional_genomics) * [Genome project](/wiki/Genome_project)
* [Human Genome Project](/wiki/Human_Genome_Project) *
[Metagenomics](/wiki/Metagenomics) * [Pangenomics](/wiki/Pangenomics) *
[Personal genomics](/wiki/Personal_genomics) * [Social
genomics](/wiki/Social_genomics) * [Structural
genomics](/wiki/Structural_genomics) [Bioinformatics](/wiki/Bioinformatics) *
[Biochip](/wiki/Biochip) * [Cheminformatics](/wiki/Cheminformatics) *
[Chemogenomics](/wiki/Chemogenomics) * [Connectomics](/wiki/Connectomics) *
[Human Connectome Project](/wiki/Human_Connectome_Project) *
[Glycomics](/wiki/Glycomics) * [Immunomics](/wiki/Immunomics) *
[Lipidomics](/wiki/Lipidomics) * [Metabolomics](/wiki/Metabolomics) *
[Microbiomics](/wiki/Microbiome) * [Nutrigenomics](/wiki/Nutrigenomics) *
[Paleopolyploidy](/wiki/Paleopolyploidy) *
[Pharmacogenetics](/wiki/Pharmacogenetics) *
[Pharmacogenomics](/wiki/Pharmacogenomics) * [Systems
biology](/wiki/Systems_biology) * [Toxicogenomics](/wiki/Toxicogenomics) *
[Transcriptomics](/wiki/Transcriptomics) [Structural
biology](/wiki/Structural_biology) * [Proteomics](/wiki/Proteomics) * [Human
proteome project](/wiki/Human_proteome_project) * [Call-map proteomics](/wiki
/Call-map_proteomics) * [Structure-based drug design](/wiki/Structure-
based_drug_design) * [Expression proteomics](/wiki/Expression_proteomics)
Research tools * [2-D electrophoresis](/wiki/2-D_electrophoresis) * [Mass
spectrometer](/wiki/Mass_spectrometer) * [Electrospray
ionization](/wiki/Electrospray_ionization) * [Matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization](/wiki/Matrix-assisted_laser_desorption_ionization) * [Matrix-
assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometer](/wiki
/Matrix-assisted_laser_desorption_ionization-time_of_flight_mass_spectrometer)
* [Microfluidic-based tools](/wiki/Microfluidic-based_tools) * [Isotope
affinity tags](/wiki/Isotope_affinity_tags) Organizations * [National
Institutes of Health](/wiki/National_Institutes_of_Health) (USA) * [DNA Data
Bank of Japan](/wiki/DNA_Data_Bank_of_Japan) (JP) * [European Molecular
Biology Laboratory](/wiki/European_Molecular_Biology_Laboratory) (EU) *
[Sanger Centre](/wiki/Sanger_Centre) (EN) * ![List-Class
article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg
/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png)
**[List](/wiki/List_of_omics_topics_in_biology) ** * ![Category](//upload.wiki
media.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-
Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) **[Category](/wiki/Category:Omics)** *
[v](/wiki/Template:Genetics) * [t](/wiki/Template_talk:Genetics) *
[e](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Template:Genetics&action;=edit)
[Genetics](/wiki/Genetics) * [Introduction](/wiki/Introduction_to_genetics) *
[Outline](/wiki/Outline_of_genetics) * [History](/wiki/History_of_genetics) *
[Index](/wiki/Index_of_genetics_articles) *
[Glossary](/wiki/Glossary_of_genetics) Key components *
[Chromosome](/wiki/Chromosome) * [DNA](/wiki/DNA) * [RNA](/wiki/RNA) *
[Nucleotide](/wiki/Nucleotide) * [Genome](/wiki/Genome) Fields *
[Classical](/wiki/Classical_genetics) *
[Conservation](/wiki/Conservation_genetics) *
[Ecological](/wiki/Ecological_genetics) *
[Immunogenetics](/wiki/Immunogenetics) * [Molecular](/wiki/Molecular_genetics)
* [Population](/wiki/Population_genetics) *
[Quantitative](/wiki/Quantitative_genetics)
[Archaeogenetics](/wiki/Archaeogenetics) of * [the
Americas](/wiki/Genetic_history_of_indigenous_peoples_of_the_Americas) * [the
British Isles](/wiki/Genetic_history_of_the_British_Isles) *
[Europe](/wiki/Genetic_history_of_Europe) *
[Italy](/wiki/Genetic_history_of_Italy) * [the Near
East](/wiki/Archaeogenetics_of_the_Near_East) * [South
Asia](/wiki/Genetics_and_archaeogenetics_of_South_Asia) Related topics *
[Behavioural genetics](/wiki/Behavioural_genetics) *
[Epigenetics](/wiki/Epigenetics) * [Geneticist](/wiki/Geneticist) * [Genome
editing](/wiki/Genome_editing) * Genomics * [Genetic code](/wiki/Genetic_code)
* [Genetic engineering](/wiki/Genetic_engineering) * [Genetic
diversity](/wiki/Genetic_diversity) * [Genetic
monitoring](/wiki/Genetic_monitoring) * [Genetic
genealogy](/wiki/Genetic_genealogy) * [Heredity](/wiki/Heredity) * [He Jiankui
affair](/wiki/He_Jiankui_affair) * [Medical genetics](/wiki/Medical_genetics)
* [Molecular evolution](/wiki/Molecular_evolution) * [Plant
genetics](/wiki/Plant_genetics) * [Reverse genetics](/wiki/Reverse_genetics)
Lists * [List of genetic codes](/wiki/List_of_genetic_codes) * [List of
genetics research
organizations](/wiki/List_of_genetics_research_organizations) * ![Category](//
upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-
Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) [Category](/wiki/Category:Genetics) * ![Commons
page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-
Commons-logo.svg.png)
**[Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Genetics)** * ![WikiPr
oject](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/People_icon.svg
/16px-People_icon.svg.png)
**[WikiProject](/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Molecular_Biology/Genetics)** *
[v](/wiki/Template:Branches_of_biology) *
[t](/wiki/Template_talk:Branches_of_biology) * [e](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Template:Branches_of_biology&action;=edit) [Branches of
biology](/wiki/Branches_of_biology) * [Aerobiology](/wiki/Aerobiology) *
[Anatomy](/wiki/Anatomy) * [Astrobiology](/wiki/Astrobiology) *
[Biochemistry](/wiki/Biochemistry) * [Bioengineering](/wiki/Bioengineering) *
[Biogeology](/wiki/Biogeology) * [Biogeography](/wiki/Biogeography) *
[Biohistory](/wiki/Biohistory) * [Biomechanics](/wiki/Biomechanics) *
[Biophysics](/wiki/Biophysics) * [Bioinformatics](/wiki/Bioinformatics) *
[Biostatistics](/wiki/Biostatistics) * [Biotechnology](/wiki/Biotechnology) *
[Botany](/wiki/Botany) * [Cell biology](/wiki/Cell_biology) * [Cellular
microbiology](/wiki/Cellular_microbiology) * [Chemical
biology](/wiki/Chemical_biology) * [Chronobiology](/wiki/Chronobiology) *
[Computational biology](/wiki/Computational_biology) * [Conservation
biology](/wiki/Conservation_biology) * [Cryobiology](/wiki/Cryobiology) *
[Cytogenetics](/wiki/Cytogenetics) * [Developmental
biology](/wiki/Developmental_biology) * [Ecology](/wiki/Ecology) * [Ecological
genetics](/wiki/Ecological_genetics) * [Embryology](/wiki/Embryology) *
[Epidemiology](/wiki/Epidemiology) * [Epigenetics](/wiki/Epigenetics) *
[Evolutionary biology](/wiki/Evolutionary_biology) * [Freshwater
biology](/wiki/Freshwater_biology) * [Geobiology](/wiki/Geobiology) *
[Genetics](/wiki/Genetics) * Genomics * [Herpetology](/wiki/Herpetology) *
[Histology](/wiki/Histology) * [Human biology](/wiki/Human_biology) *
[Immunology](/wiki/Immunology) * [Marine biology](/wiki/Marine_biology) *
[Mathematical biology](/wiki/Mathematical_and_theoretical_biology) *
[Microbiology](/wiki/Microbiology) * [Molecular
biology](/wiki/Molecular_biology) * [Mycology](/wiki/Mycology) *
[Neontology](/wiki/Neontology) * [Neuroscience](/wiki/Neuroscience) *
[Nutrition](/wiki/Nutrition) * [Origin of life](/wiki/Abiogenesis) *
[Paleontology](/wiki/Paleontology) * [Parasitology](/wiki/Parasitology) *
[Pathology](/wiki/Pathology) * [Pharmacology](/wiki/Pharmacology) *
[Phycology](/wiki/Phycology) * [Phylogenetics](/wiki/Phylogenetics) *
[Physiology](/wiki/Physiology) * [Quantum biology](/wiki/Quantum_biology) *
[Sociobiology](/wiki/Sociobiology) * [Structural
biology](/wiki/Structural_biology) * [Systematics](/wiki/Systematics) *
[Synthetic biology](/wiki/Synthetic_biology) *
[Xenobiology](/wiki/Xenobiology) * [Systems biology](/wiki/Systems_biology) *
[Taxonomy](/wiki/Biological_classification) * [Teratology](/wiki/Teratology) *
[Toxicology](/wiki/Toxicology) * [Virology](/wiki/Virology) *
[Virophysics](/wiki/Virophysics) * [Zoology](/wiki/Zoology) See also *
[History of biology](/wiki/History_of_biology) * [Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine](/wiki/Nobel_Prize_in_Physiology_or_Medicine) * [Timeline of biology
and organic chemistry](/wiki/Timeline_of_biology_and_organic_chemistry) *
[v](/wiki/Template:Genealogical_DNA_test) *
[t](/wiki/Template_talk:Genealogical_DNA_test) * [e](https://en.wikipedia.org/
w/index.php?title=Template:Genealogical_DNA_test&action;=edit) [Genealogical
DNA testing](/wiki/Genealogical_DNA_test) *
[Procedure](/wiki/Genealogical_DNA_test#Procedure) * [Types of
tests](/wiki/Genealogical_DNA_test#Types_of_tests) *
[Haplogroup](/wiki/Haplogroup) / [Haplotype](/wiki/Haplotype) /
[Subclade](/wiki/Subclade) * [Genetic genealogy](/wiki/Genetic_genealogy)
People * [Bennett Greenspan](/wiki/Bennett_Greenspan) * [Spencer
Wells](/wiki/Spencer_Wells) * [Anne Wojcicki](/wiki/Anne_Wojcicki) Societies *
[International Society of Genetic
Genealogy](/wiki/International_Society_of_Genetic_Genealogy) Projects *
[Genographic Project](/wiki/Genographic_Project) * [Melungeon DNA
Project](/wiki/Melungeon_DNA_Project) * [Surname DNA
project](/wiki/Surname_DNA_project) Services * [23andMe](/wiki/23andMe) *
[Family Tree DNA](/wiki/Family_Tree_DNA) * [Living DNA](/wiki/Living_DNA) * ![
Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon
.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png)
**[Category](/wiki/Category:Genetic_genealogy)**
![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1) Retrieved
from "[https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genomics&oldid;=974
994287](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genomics&oldid;=974994287)"
[Categories](/wiki/Help:Category): * [Genomics](/wiki/Category:Genomics)
Hidden categories: * [Pages containing links to subscription-only
content](/wiki/Category:Pages_containing_links_to_subscription-only_content) *
[Articles with short
description](/wiki/Category:Articles_with_short_description) * [Short
description matches
Wikidata](/wiki/Category:Short_description_matches_Wikidata) * [Articles
containing potentially dated statements from October 2011](/wiki/Category:Arti
cles_containing_potentially_dated_statements_from_October_2011) * [All
articles containing potentially dated statements](/wiki/Category:All_articles_
containing_potentially_dated_statements) * [Pages with DOIs inactive as of
2020 August](/wiki/Category:Pages_with_DOIs_inactive_as_of_2020_August) ##
Navigation menu ### Personal tools * Not logged in *
[Talk](/wiki/Special:MyTalk) * [Contributions](/wiki/Special:MyContributions)
* [Create
account](/w/index.php?title=Special:CreateAccount&returnto;=Genomics) * [Log
in](/w/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto;=Genomics) ### Namespaces *
[Article](/wiki/Genomics) * [Talk](/wiki/Talk:Genomics) ### Variants ### Views
* [Read](/wiki/Genomics) * [Edit](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=edit) *
[View history](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=history) ### More ###
Search ### Navigation * [Main page](/wiki/Main_Page) *
[Contents](/wiki/Wikipedia:Contents) * [Current
events](/wiki/Portal:Current_events) * [Random article](/wiki/Special:Random)
* [About Wikipedia](/wiki/Wikipedia:About) * [Contact
us](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Contact_us) * [Donate](https://donate.wi
kimedia.org/wiki/Special:FundraiserRedirector?utm_source=donate&utm;_medium=si
debar&utm;_campaign=C13_en.wikipedia.org&uselang;=en) * [Wikipedia
store](//shop.wikimedia.org) ### Contribute * [Help](/wiki/Help:Contents) *
[Community portal](/wiki/Wikipedia:Community_portal) * [Recent
changes](/wiki/Special:RecentChanges) * [Upload
file](/wiki/Wikipedia:File_Upload_Wizard) ### Tools * [What links
here](/wiki/Special:WhatLinksHere/Genomics) * [Related
changes](/wiki/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Genomics) * [Upload
file](/wiki/Wikipedia:File_Upload_Wizard) * [Special
pages](/wiki/Special:SpecialPages) * [Permanent
link](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&oldid;=974994287) * [Page
information](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&action;=info) * [Cite this page](/w/i
ndex.php?title=Special:CiteThisPage&page;=Genomics&id;=974994287&wpFormIdentif
ier;=titleform) * [Wikidata
item](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Special:EntityPage/Q222046) ###
Print/export * [Download as
PDF](/w/index.php?title=Special:DownloadAsPdf&page;=Genomics&action;=show-
download-screen) * [Printable
version](/w/index.php?title=Genomics&printable;=yes) ### In other projects *
[Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Genomics) *
[Wikiquote](https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Genomics) ### Languages * [العربية](
https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%B9%D9%84%D9%85_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AC%D9%8A%D9%8
6%D9%88%D9%85) * [Azərbaycanca](https://az.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) * [বাং
লা](https://bn.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E0%A6%AC%E0%A6%82%E0%A6%B6%E0%A6%BE%E0%A6%A
3%E0%A7%81%E0%A6%B8%E0%A6%AE%E0%A6%97%E0%A7%8D%E0%A6%B0_%E0%A6%AC%E0%A6%BF%E0%
A6%9C%E0%A7%8D%E0%A6%9E%E0%A6%BE%E0%A6%A8) * [Bân-lâm-gú](https://zh-min-
nan.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%9Bi-tho%C3%A2n-th%C3%A9-ha%CC%8Dk) * [Башҡортса](ht
tps://ba.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%93%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%BC%D0%B8%D0%BA%D0%B0)
* [Беларуская](https://be.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%93%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%BC%D1
%96%D0%BA%D0%B0) * [Bosanski](https://bs.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[Català](https://ca.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gen%C3%B2mica) *
[Čeština](https://cs.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[Eesti](https://et.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genoomika) * [Ελληνικά](https://el.wikip
edia.org/wiki/%CE%93%CE%BF%CE%BD%CE%B9%CE%B4%CE%B9%CF%89%CE%BC%CE%B1%CF%84%CE%
B9%CE%BA%CE%AE) * [Español](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gen%C3%B3mica) *
[Euskara](https://eu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[فارسی](https://fa.wikipedia.org/wiki/%DA%98%D9%86%D9%88%D9%85%DB%8C%DA%A9) *
[Français](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%A9nomique) *
[Gaeilge](https://ga.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%A9an%C3%B3ma%C3%ADocht) *
[Galego](https://gl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xen%C3%B3mica) *
[한국어](https://ko.wikipedia.org/wiki/%EC%9C%A0%EC%A0%84%EC%B2%B4%ED%95%99) * [Հ
այերեն](https://hy.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D4%B3%D5%A5%D5%B6%D5%B8%D5%B4%D5%AB%D5%
AF%D5%A1) * [हिन्दी](https://hi.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E0%A4%9C%E0%A5%80%E0%A4%A8
%E0%A5%8B%E0%A4%AE%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%95%E0%A5%8D%E0%A4%B8) * [Bahasa
Indonesia](https://id.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[Íslenska](https://is.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erf%C3%B0amengjafr%C3%A6%C3%B0i) *
[Italiano](https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomica) * [עברית](https://he.wikipe
dia.org/wiki/%D7%92%D7%A0%D7%95%D7%9E%D7%99%D7%A7%D7%94) *
[Lietuvių](https://lt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[Magyar](https://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[Nederlands](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomica) * [日本語](https://ja.wikipe
dia.org/wiki/%E3%82%B2%E3%83%8E%E3%83%9F%E3%82%AF%E3%82%B9) * [Norsk
bokmål](https://no.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomikk) *
[Novial](https://nov.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomike) *
[Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча](https://uz.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[Polski](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[Português](https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gen%C3%B3mica) *
[Română](https://ro.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomic%C4%83) * [Русский](https://ru.w
ikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%93%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%BC%D0%B8%D0%BA%D0%B0) * [Simple
English](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomics) * [Српски / srpski](https
://sr.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%93%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%BC%D0%B8%D0%BA%D0%B0) *
[Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски](https://sh.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomika) *
[Suomi](https://fi.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomiikka) *
[Svenska](https://sv.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomik) * [தமிழ்](https://ta.wikipedi
a.org/wiki/%E0%AE%AE%E0%AE%B0%E0%AE%AA%E0%AE%A3%E0%AF%81%E0%AE%A4%E0%AF%8D%E0%
AE%A4%E0%AF%8A%E0%AE%95%E0%AF%88%E0%AE%AF%E0%AE%BF%E0%AE%AF%E0%AE%B2%E0%AF%8D)
* [ไทย](https://th.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E0%B8%88%E0%B8%B5%E0%B9%82%E0%B8%99%E0%
B8%A1%E0%B8%B4%E0%B8%81%E0%B8%AA%E0%B9%8C) *
[Türkçe](https://tr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genomik) * [Українська](https://uk.wiki
pedia.org/wiki/%D0%93%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%BC%D1%96%D0%BA%D0%B0) * [Tiếng
Việt](https://vi.wikipedia.org/wiki/H%E1%BB%87_gen_h%E1%BB%8Dc) *
[中文](https://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E5%9F%BA%E5%9B%A0%E7%B5%84%E5%AD%B8) [Edit
links](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Special:EntityPage/Q222046 #sitelinks-
wikipedia) * This page was last edited on 26 August 2020, at 03:37 (UTC). *
Text is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
License](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia
:Text_of_Creative_Commons_Attribution-ShareAlike_3.0_Unported_License);
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the [Terms of
Use](//foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Terms_of_Use) and [Privacy
Policy](//foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Privacy_policy). Wikipedia® is a
registered trademark of the [Wikimedia Foundation,
Inc.](//www.wikimediafoundation.org/), a non-profit organization. * [Privacy
policy](https://foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Privacy_policy) * [About
Wikipedia](/wiki/Wikipedia:About) *
[Disclaimers](/wiki/Wikipedia:General_disclaimer) * [Contact
Wikipedia](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Contact_us) * [Mobile view](//en.
m.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genomics&mobileaction;=toggle_view_mobile) *
[Developers](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/How_to_contribu
te) * [Statistics](https://stats.wikimedia.org/#/en.wikipedia.org) * [Cookie
statement](https://foundation.wikimedia.org/wiki/Cookie_statement) *
![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/footer/wikimedia-button.png) *
![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/footer/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
*[[v]: View this template *[[e]: Edit this template *[[t]: Discuss this
template

